OSDOCS-6677: add new mco/mcc cert procedure (#65850)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/checking-mco-status-certs.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * post_installation_configuration/machine-configuration-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="checking-mco-status-certs_{context}"]
= Viewing and interacting with certificates

The following certificates are handled in the cluster by the Machine Config Controller (MCC) and can be found in the `ControllerConfig` resource:

* `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet-ca.crt`
* `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/configmaps/cloud-config/ca-bundle.pem`
* `/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/openshift-config-user-ca-bundle.crt`

> 

Reviewer: Apart from those certificates, MCC handles the "image registry" certificates and the  "image registry user bundle" certificate as well.

> Use the following procedure to get information about the certificates, including the underyling bundle the certificate comes from, and the signing and subject data.

Author: great suggestion, thanks!

.Procedure

> * Run the following command to get certificate information:

Reviewer 2: Suggest to put what you are going to do first. Per https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#code-blocks-command-syntax-and-example-output

```suggestion
* To get detailed certificate information, run the following command:
```

or 

```suggestion
* Get detailed certificate information by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc describe controllerconfig/machine-config-controller

Reviewer 3: `$ oc get controllerconfig/machine-config-controller -o yaml | yq -y '.status.controllerCertificates'`

----
+
.Expected output
+
[source,text]
----
"controllerCertificates": [
                   {
                       "bundleFile": "KubeAPIServerServingCAData",
                       "signer": "<signer_data1>",
                       "subject": "CN=openshift-kube-apiserver-operator_node-system-admin-signer@168909215"
                   },
                   {
                       "bundleFile": "RootCAData",
                       "signer": "<signer_data2>",
                       "subject": "CN=root-ca,OU=openshift"
                   }
                ]
----

> * Alternatively, you can access a simpler version of the information found in the ControllerConfig by checking the machine config pool status:

Reviewer 2: Since this is presented as an either or, I don't think you need alternatively here. You can show what the either/or options are by wording the starting part of the sentence. And make them more parallel to each other. Depending on which way you chose for the two options I gave for the first bullet, could be something like:

```suggestion
* To get a simple version of the certificate information, run the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get mcp master -o yaml | grep certExpirys -B1 -A15

Reviewer 3: `$ oc get mcp master -ojsonpath='{.status.certExpirys}' | jq`

Reviewer 3: `$ oc get mcp master -o yaml | yq -y '.status.certExpirys'`

----
+
.Expected output
+
[source,text]
----
status:
  certExpirys:
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=admin-kubeconfig-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-csr-signer_@1689585558
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-control-plane-signer,OU=openshift
----
+
This method is meant for {product-title} applications that already consume machine config pool information.

> You can check which certificates are on the nodes by looking at `/etc/docker/cert.d`.

Reviewer 2: Should this be presented as a third bullet option?

```suggestion
* To check which certificates are on the nodes, review the `/etc/docker/cert.d` file.
```

(or directory, not sure which it is)

Reviewer 4: This is a directory, so the we should not change this bullet. I will grab an example of this

Reviewer 4: ```
sh-5.1# ls /etc/docker/certs.d
image-registry.openshift-image-registry.svc.cluster.local:5000	image-registry.openshift-image-registry.svc:5000
```
and then
```
sh-5.1# ls /etc/docker/certs.d/image-registry.openshift-image-registry.svc.cluster.local:5000
ca.crt
```
so each IR cert has one entry called ca.crt inside of its sub directory

Author: I ended up adding it as a separate bullet with an example output. Thanks y'all!

> You can check which certificates are on the nodes by looking at `/etc/docker/cert.d`.

Reviewer: In  `/etc/docker/cert.d` we will find the "image registry" certificates and the "image registry user bundle" certificate.

The rest of the certificates have their own path, that we mention at the beginning of the document

* `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet-ca.crt`
* `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/configmaps/cloud-config/ca-bundle.pem`
* `/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/openshift-config-user-ca-bundle.crt`

Please, @cdoern  could your confirm that?

Reviewer 4: Yes, sorry I should have clarified that. The data inside of /etc/docker/certs.d is solely image registry certificates.

                   },
                   {
                       "bundleFile": "RootCAData",
                       "signer": "<signer_data2>",
                       "subject": "CN=root-ca,OU=openshift"
                   }
                ]
----

* Get a simpler version of the information found in the ControllerConfig by checking the machine config pool status using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get mcp master -o yaml | yq -y '.status.certExpirys'
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,text]
----
status:
  certExpirys:
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=admin-kubeconfig-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-csr-signer_@1689585558
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-control-plane-signer,OU=openshift
----
+
This method is meant for {product-title} applications that already consume machine config pool information.

> You can check which certificates are on the nodes by looking at `/etc/docker/cert.d`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can check which Image Registry certificates are on the nodes by looking at `/etc/docker/cert.d`.
The other certificates as mentioned above live at these paths on the nodes: 
* `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet-ca.crt`
* `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/configmaps/cloud-config/ca-bundle.pem`
* `/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/openshift-config-user-ca-bundle.crt`
```

or something like this.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * post_installation_configuration/machine-configuration-tasks.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="checking-mco-status-certs_{context}"]
= Viewing and interacting with certificates

The following certificates are handled in the cluster by the Machine Config Controller (MCC) and can be found in the ControllerConfig:

* `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet-ca.crt`
* `/etc/kubernetes/static-pod-resources/configmaps/cloud-config/ca-bundle.pem`
* `/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/openshift-config-user-ca-bundle.crt`

Use the following procedure to get information about the certificates, including the underyling bundle the certificate comes from, the expiration lower and upper bounds, and the signing and subject data.

.Procedure

* Run the following command to get certificate information:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get controllerconfig-machine-controller

Reviewer 4: `oc describe controllerconfig/machine-config-controller`

----
+
.Expected output
+
[source,text]
----
"controllerCertificates": [
                   {
                       "bundleFile": "KubeAPIServerServingCAData",

>                        "notAfter": "2024-07-10 16:15:50 +0000 UTC",
>                        "notBefore": "2023-07-11 16:15:49 +0000 UTC",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

                       "signer": "<signer_data1>",
                       "subject": "CN=openshift-kube-apiserver-operator_node-system-admin-signer@168909215"
                   },
                   {
                       "bundleFile": "RootCAData",

>                        "notAfter": "2033-07-08 16:04:12 +0000 UTC",
>                        "notBefore": "2023-07-11 16:04:12 +0000 UTC",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

                       "signer": "<signer_data2>",
                       "subject": "CN=root-ca,OU=openshift"
                   }
                ]
----

* Alternatively, you can access a simpler version of the information found in the ControllerConfig by checking the machine config pool status:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get mcp master -o yaml | grep certExpirys -B1 -A15
----
+
.Expected output
+
[source,text]
----
status:

>   certExpirys:
>   - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
>     expiry: 2033-07-14 09:04:22 +0000 UTC
>     subject: CN=admin-kubeconfig-signer,OU=openshift
>   - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
>     expiry: 2023-07-18 09:04:26 +0000 UTC
>     subject: CN=kube-csr-signer_@1689585558
>   - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
>     expiry: 2023-07-18 09:04:26 +0000 UTC
>     subject: CN=kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
>   - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
>     expiry: 2023-07-16 09:04:27 +0000 UTC
>     subject: CN=kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
>   - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
>     expiry: 2023-07-16 09:04:27 +0000 UTC
>     subject: CN=kube-control-plane-signer,OU=openshift

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  certExpirys:
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=admin-kubeconfig-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-csr-signer_@1689585558
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer,OU=openshift
  - bundle: KubeAPIServerServingCAData
    subject: CN=kube-control-plane-signer,OU=openshift
```
